hey everyone hey and welcome back to yet
another episode of watching The Watchmen
slight deviation from normal course
we're not talking about Watchmen but we
are talk about Alan Moore which I think
it's a fair trade
someone who I've just started
worshipping recently like I've always
been a fan but I bought loads of his
stuff over the Christmas period
I've been reading a biography on him
death he's my goddamn hero
why there's a death to his storytelling
there's some sort of like secondary
tertiary layer to everything that he
does that I just really admire and yet
you know from learning about this guy's
you know life Northampton born and bred
you know I even want a boy like his
early 2,080 Doctor Who comics
I hate Doctor Who but I would read an
Alan Moore Doctor Who comic nice nice oh
yeah hey Doctor Who I want this is
getting really introspective already of
it you could imagine a Dalek doing a
Rorschach test or something about some
early prototype they're definitely in
that world ending but um you know we'll
get to more how are you man yeah I'm
really good man my website went down
this morning so any panic in fixing that
but other than that we're all good
definition decoder UK we buck up by the
time you hear this but yeah we've taken
a little break you know not doing
Doomsday Clock either we're doing our
first sort of official this is not
watchman sort of thing here you know
Killing Joke was an obvious choice I
suppose yeah I mean it's very much what
heralded as one of the greatest Batman
stories ever told
and actually already reviewed it over at
my website I am I don't want to give too
much away and I think of it but it's
it's quite highly regarded by me as well
and pretty much it I mean I've never
really met a comic book reader who
doesn't like it it shook up the DC
Universe quite heavily by not only
telling the Joker's origin story and but
also placed one of Batman's major allies
in a wheelchair so it's got a lot of
history to it originally it was meant to
be an else world story I think but it
was so popular that they just decided to
go with it and put it in the main cannon
yeah yeah and I think it was
chronologically
after Watchmen the first thing I think
he did afterwards on DC at least and can
you imagine at the time you've read
Watchmen and you're like what the [ __ ]
is this guy coming oh he's doing a
Batman Joker story yeah you know I mean
you'd be foaming to get this yeah art
amazing especially for me and it's a
great piece of work every time I read it
I'm kind of surprised by how short it is
yes I am I always kind of remember in my
head to be longer and more grandiose and
intricate but it's on the surface it's
pretty much it takes place over the
space of about one night and obviously
it's thematically it centers around how
one bad day can turn you from the nicest
guy in the world to an evil supervillain
or a vigilante an hero and it's it's
really it's really concise there's not
really much time wasted in it and it's
just a nice book and its influence
cannot be understated not only is it a
fantastic story as you say a one-shot
highly influential in the comic world
highly influential on the film world you
know yeah him but I mentioned it
Christopher Nolan said you know it's
certain influence of the version of
Joker in the Dark Knight Heath Ledger
apparently given a copy didn't read it
though yeah so yeah I wouldn't say his
performance was very heavily influenced
by this book I mean perhaps the multiple
past sure and backgrounds but other than
that yeah it's not I wouldn't say it's
massively influenced by it no but I mean
it's just you know Batman is gritty
yes sir an extent though like the you
know we both love Grant Morrison's
all-star Superman wasn't there an
all-star Batman but he was like trash or
something i don't i'm not ready um yeah
there's an all-star Batman and Robin the
one I'm thinking of yeah yeah and
neither one's meant to be good at make
sure you read that yeah it's really
really good I don't know why he decided
to use a similar name right um well you
know all right has had their ups and
downs I recently I've just read um
action comics from the new 52 which it
was written by Grant Morrison I just saw
our Wow another
Superman story I'm starting off the
universe by Grant Morrison it's it's
gonna be as good as all-star Superman
it's it's not good it's pretty it's
pretty crap mmm-hmm yeah
which is a shame what's wrong with it
that it sounds perfect
you're just firing back here um yeah it
just kind of drops all the potential
that he has and Grant Morrison can be
very creative and go off on it and do
his own things like it starts off with
Superman basically in jeans and a
t-shirt with the letter with the
Superman symbol on so you know it's a
very updated design he's also got the
red cape so it's just basically a guy
he's against the law and he's taken down
mobsters but it all sort of quickly
drops it for their alien invasion by
Brainiac and he gets his standard suit
and it just kind of just feels a bit of
a waste and you know we've spoken about
Alan Moore a hell of a lot on this show
we'll continue to speak about him at the
moment I'm actually reading top ten
which I'm not over the moon with I don't
mean to upset more fans but I also
bought the bo Geoffrey saga which is
kind of his coronation Street
impersonation from the mid 80s so nice
yet to read that that's very on Watchmen
nine panel is literally just like you
know like sort of satirical cartoon in
The Guardian it's just sort of yeah
Moore's musings on you know a vegetable
patch that actually means nuclear war or
you know there's some sort of obvious
comparison there but yeah Brian Bolland
is the artist for this book
you know it's similar to a Dave Gibbons
he is the co-star here
his art is incredible I think he
produces an you know fantastic book he's
a brilliant talent right yeah he's
really good I think he's you know what
I've done gonna say who's better than Bo
you really good he hasn't done that many
Batman stories and which is a shame we
tend to do a lot of variant covers and
but his art works really realistic and
originally like one of the biggest
controversies around this book is that
it was actually recolored sure and so
there was a first edition of it and
where the colors were kind of a knee
and then Brian Bolland went back and
recolored it for the deluxe edition and
you know I'll go into my thoughts later
on it on exactly what I think is better
but he does a really good job of
bringing his work to life in a realistic
manner um and a lot of the you know the
drawings that he does on near for
realistic at points is really really
good and I think it just brings a whole
grittiness and realism to this story
yeah completely I just checked on his
Wikipedia he's early series from him
it's called Camelot 3000 I need to read
this the series follows The Adventures
of King arfer Merlin and the Rhian kites
of the round table as they emerge in an
overpopulated future world of 3000 AD to
fight off an alien invasion
nice come on it's 3,000 yeah I've seen
is the front cover
if you've read Camelot 3000 leave us a
comment get in touch of us as we're
watching The Watchmen part at gmail.com
we have some great emails we won't read
any out today but we've got tons of
great watchmen emails to keep them
coming what you think on the issues what
you think on this indeed really how in
the future you know comment below as
well we'll put all the links in the
description but um The Killing Joke
death we best get to The Killing Joke
yeah I've got the deluxe edition I don't
know if you have yeah and it's got the
if you take away the dust cover it's got
an embossed front and back and indeed a
spine as well yeah and like most books
yes it's effectively like the last panel
blog that's really nice isn't it awesome
yeah really good to be honest a lot of
the time when they do this I actually
prefer it to the dust cover and but you
know I need a cover from the dust so
I've got to leave it there yeah but yeah
it's really nice yeah I am I like how
when you open it as well there's just a
black page with the Joker's eyes and
Batman The Killing Joke and then the
next page is that the darkness has gone
and it's just Joker they're laughing in
that iconic panel and where it's got all
the hahaha is in the background it's
probably about a tattoo it's pretty
tattoo on probably a million people hell
yeah I know if you go a Comicon you'll
see yeah yeah yeah yes some dude from
Texas has God as a back piece No
exactly and yet I didn't know it's
actually but yeah if you just move the
front page back and forth which Joker's
always yeah you know centric fruits that
yeah that is crazy that is so effective
and yet yeah just the Hat has kind of
dominating the entire screen there and
there is an introduction as well by Tim
sale and he speaks about the coloring
issue he said you know this time around
you have the fantastic treats in the
book colored by the artist himself and
sees more complete vision of how the
story should look um I haven't I saw a
would YouTube vid death of someone
comparing and like you said veiny like
you know I think certainly the origin
scene when he's kind of ascending out of
the water it's colored much nicer in
this one much more drained yeah which I
don't know if I like it as much I think
that sort of the the crazy colors work
better for the Joker's personality it's
been toned back very heavily and I think
the book sort of suffers for it in the
inner Joker story I just think the
colors should fit his personality rather
than be muted um however the dulling of
the palette you know it does help to
heavily ground this book in reality so
there's no real definitive answer for
what works better him but just for
personal preference I would probably go
with the original but then again I don't
know if it's because I read that first
and they've sort of George Lucas one of
my favorite works but yet I mean it's it
would be like if they recolored The Dark
Knight Returns I think they would lose a
lot of the ambience and the the
character of that book and in doing this
with The Killing Joke I also think
they've not only lost a bit of the
character of the book but also of the
Joker himself mm-hmm and it's funny you
mention Anxi because I recently
encountered Watchmen noir which is why
don't you seen his Watchmen black and
white essentially yeah um I don't like
it I looked for it I was like oh it's
just missing so much it's nowhere near
as effective yeah TC do a lot of new
boots
who is that before like the edgy teen I
don't understand
it's just people who want to see like
the perhaps pensive artists yeah like I
did have soul you know how the lady your
biggest fan
he bought me Batman hush in black and
white ham and yeah it was it was nice
you could sort of see actually know why
wasn't it was Batman hush and wrapped up
which is where you can see the eyes work
nor is literal just black and white so I
don't know what they're doing there I'll
get rid of it get rid of them yeah and
also talking of Watchmen sorry we'll get
to the Killing Joke straight away I
saying to you I watched an annotated
which came out recently which is going
forward by Dave Gibbons it's basically a
reprint of Watchmen as a bigger coffee
table book we've annotated notes anyone
that follows watch when obviously
follows our podcast I myself definitely
rely on a few webpages that just
annotated notes of the issues really
brilliant you know the criticisms that
I've you know often use and pilfer from
you know they're so inspired looking
through this book it's kind of trash
like this quite a few pages I don't have
annotations and it's like no no no no
everything you've missing it every
single panel of Watchmen is worthy of a
page at least listen at the podcast
before you start annotating we need
someone like me who just doesn't know
our researcher no cuz you do your
research and stuff whereas I just I
don't have time for that I just
literally come on in with sprawl out
stuff for an hour and half yeah so you
don't need both oh well you're right you
you do the research and we just come on
with the crap jokes but everyone hates
listen to this podcast you don't need to
buy Watchmen annotated but we'll get to
the first panel which I know from the
brilliant Alamo biography that
supposedly what he sent Brian was an
incredibly in-depth couple of pages
about this first panel just the rain and
the circles that's it yeah just you know
obviously this means everything you know
with more and this panel in particular
is very important to the concurrent
theme of more the mirroring you know the
symmetry you know the suggestion of
difference through the or
but yeah we begin here with the rain
falling and you know something like this
cannot help be a vaca t'v right yeah and
it's great how the book sort of opens on
how it ends to me there's an entire
analogy throughout this book of Batman
and the Joker being opposites of each
other and this it's sort of like looking
into a mirror and seeing the the
reflection of yourself and your darkest
moments or the Joker looking into the
mirror and seeing Batman reflected back
which is the the best that it could be
so it's great that the entire book
thematically is a mirror and it opens on
a rain puddle which is exactly how it
ends see that's why you don't do
research Tom you come out with amazing
stuff like that the research just holds
your back yeah and it's it's just
atmospheric and it there's no dialogue
for like the first three pages no which
is a really atmospheric way to open and
you know you instantly gripped by it
like what's going on and it's very
slowly paced and one of the great things
about the 9 panel grid is that you can
take your time with stuff and seconds
can be stretched out into two minutes
and it can be really well paced whereas
when you sort of divert from the grid
and draw it yourself the reader can sort
of just rush through things which is why
I actually prefer this it's called
prestige panel in Tom that's another
thing I picked up from doing my research
online oh no they've discovered is and
yeah so it's just really well paced
really atmospheric it doesn't need to
have big bombastic moments but it still
draws you in and you can kinda get by
like the the stuff that Batman passes
throughout that this is a really
intimidating guy and it's almost like
he's gone on his final mission and this
is like we're picking up directly at
like this is almost the end for Batman
and you know incredibly evocative the
density of these shadows the third
paneling you know with the Batmobile
visible yeah with the lights so
suggestive you know and and the way the
sort of
the refraction has made this X that kind
of just centralizes us towards I mean I
love the fifth panel as well but you
know the spikes on Batman's wrist you
know coincident or with the kind of edgy
windshield
you know the spikes of the manor itself
you know everything about this man is so
iconic yeah and it's so sharp and like
it just stands out which is kind of why
I also prefer the the old colored
version as well and it sort of just
leaps off the page a bit more whereas
this is sort of more like watching a
movie
and but yeah it's still expertly done we
see like Harvey Dent there a lot of its
silhouette as well which Batman he's
very much known for for living in the
shadows so it's just a really
well-thought-out waited to pick the
Caped Crusader and establishing impanel
light when we see Commissioner Gordon
and some assemble grunts you know
Batman's human chin you know he is
fallible yeah maybe there's some sort of
you know glassed your kind of thing
they're just evoke in you know the
humanity that can be punctured here but
you know this runs throughout doesn't it
that this is Batman yeah yeah definitely
and it's you know you don't really get
much of the human aspect of him in this
book it's always sort of in the persona
but there's definitely signs of weakness
in there especially with his opener
where you know it's rare that this is
sort of the approach for the superhero
to go into the villain and plea for him
to stop and he's begging for him to like
the end this before one of them killing
like ends up killing the other one
there's which is you know it's a very
it's a very pacifist approach which
isn't often depicted in comics a lot of
the time it's the hero shows about the
lair and just kicks the crap out of the
villain and saves the day and that's it
but this is like a really nice grounded
and thoughtful way to approach a villain
sympathetically and be like look I'm not
here to hurt you I just want to talk to
you we never have this conversation man
to man it's always fists
and I just please stop yeah you know
it's like when people email this podcast
telling me to stop doing the jokes
they're just like stuff oh we see Harvey
Dent yeah which is like just that you
know not important it's a very nice kind
of haha sort of moment they had to have
someone in the cell you know we see
other people later on yeah you know the
whole thing in of itself if you're going
for that kind of quote-unquote last
story aspect it does have a lot of wink
references yeah and it's just like it's
really good at world-building but not
doing it over the top um it's sort of
letting you know that Batman's biggest
villain is the Joker for the fact that
he just completely walked past Harvey
Dent and just doesn't see him as like
you know it doesn't even look at him he
just rolls past him Harvey Dent's kind
of looking longingly at the gate wanting
to be more important and but it's just
not and Batman just really wants to get
to the root of this problem and end it
once and for all
I love the bar dividing his face it yes
so simple but yeah very very clever
yeah and it's one of the only characters
that you could do it with as well yeah
and so it's clear that Moore's put a lot
of thought into this yes he just nails
as well from behind it's great yeah and
he finally gets to the cell and which is
number zero eight zero one and this to
Batman oh I was got it made because I
was sure that somewhere um it was like
the letters of the alphabet and it was
Menace fell out so if he took zero as a
for some reason in my head I'd built it
up as zero 800 and um no sorry zero
eight zero eight and I'd built that up
in my head is that if you take these
letters of the alphabet it spells out
haha hmm but it doesn't it just spells
out a hub a.m. what Moby Dick the Joker
you could be a habit actually mentioned
a cup the times in Batman comics but
it's always kind of an insult and from
the Joker to like
got something okay but it doesn't make a
reappearance later and Scott Snyder's
run and Batman visits The Joker's sell
an endgame and he's still in a zero
eight zero one sir so it's nice that you
know someone at least references this
book further down the line yeah yeah I'm
sure there is multiple inference is not
that much depth that I know about to it
yeah
and the copier dummy research that's all
good it's all good what the comments are
therefore to correct us please please
let us know
but yeah Batman descends upon the cell
that the cop you know salutes yeah and
this is I mean maybe I don't know my
Batman history but this sort of face of
them too okay it's not you know Joe
could we learn very soon but this sort
of you know spotlit face off very dark
no yes right yeah to be honest when I
first read this I did kind of part of
have a problem with Batman's like
obsessed over this villain and he
doesn't recognize that it's not him but
growing up I can kind of see you know
exactly what why wouldn't he saw more
has this a matching version of the Joker
rather than the actual version of him so
yeah it's just a nice touching moment
that he's went to play with them and
it's also at this point that the first
line of dialogue within the book is
there were these two guys in a lunatic
asylum which of course later down the
line becomes The Killing Joke and it's
nice that it starts off here and it just
lets you tonally know that there's these
two guys trapped in a lunatic asylum
little do you know exactly how much this
this line pays off in the end
and just our first Batman lines hello I
came to talk you know yeah the the
simplicity the sincerity as you said the
honesty you know to what his motives are
and yeah I didn't really consider him
not knowing it's Joe crow not obviously
I know it's 9 but him not noticing
straight away but yeah
yeah I didn't consider that I suppose
I'll have to just deal with that but
yeah I guess if their same sort of body
shapes I guess yeah how wet like Batman
knows this person Batman as
ripped and punch this person probably
hundreds of times yeah exactly
he's hitting the lad in the face yeah
profile mentally if you believe some of
the theories he loves the lad right so
yeah he would he would recognize him and
you know the giveaway is the fact that
you know he's got makeup which works
well I think in establishing the Joker
character darkly you know there's a more
permanent fixture of what years he isn't
someone isn't costumed as you know so
many of what Batman faces off to and
it's interesting though that again it's
not Joker but he talks like Joker yeah
um it's probably just because it's a
guard who's night it doesn't even talk
the guy doesn't even does he know his
Hawk he doesn't even talk why the hell
are you on about
now he doesn't talk so yeah he just says
the only thing he says is her hey okay
they didn't feel like jogger to me but
ya know I go he's saying and then I want
to read where the arrows point to Tom
that's a little tip tray there and we
see you know when when he took talks
further in more double speak in the
juxtaposition of him being touched you
know he gets pulled into a great panel
you know where Batman's follow me in a
very eighties panel I'm sort of
interaction between them right yeah
brilliant
it's so he's angry this guy is terrified
he's pulling them so hard that he's like
ripping his sleeves from his t-shirt
we're brothers you know we [ __ ] yeah and
it's just it's just human eyes
he's like confessed his love to this guy
and it's not him yeah as we all would be
yeah and you know hair on throat harm
one hair on his head inevitably goes to
a wig being yelled off which which is
classic really he calls him a whimpering
little smear of slime slime does come
out later as well sometimes called a
slime ball or something I can't quite
remember exactly where that strikes but
we get Joker then you know in a familiar
environment
it's a bloody carnival from doomsday -
yeah it's nice innit yeah I'm surprised
that this this like location isn't used
more
often for the Joker it kind of seems
like the perfect like place for him it's
just great that the Joker's appearance
also breaks the 9 panel grid with his
face that he shows you know Batman is on
this very rigid structure and because
Batman represents order and the Joker
represents chaos so it's nice that his
first appearance in the book is it's
just causing chaos to the page itself
it's very fourth wall breaking and yeah
it's really it's just a really good
entrance and I love that you know
Fairgrounds do have a sinister side to
them they're they're all bright and
colorful but if you go there and I
guarantee you will create yourself and
so it's nice that it's mores picked this
location that's normally full of life
and so exuberant and twisted it almost
in it this really sinister villains lair
yeah without really necessarily changing
anything like we learn about the rides
of being dilapidated etc and you know
don't like it don't care you know I'm
crazy for it which is a wonderful sort
of half turn there but for me it's just
the reality these places seeing that
dosed out clown in that glass box you
know there's nothing Joker did there
that's just what it looks like and
that's kind of what they do look like
it's yeah you know it's play fair the
fat lady is well gals be glad it ain't
you is is the tagline there is nice as
well we learnt it free legged man
two-headed baby you know these aren't
things that aren't you know have existed
in the past perhaps collectively in the
subconscious of more you know it's
definitely there and yeah I I love it I
love everything about this first panel
introducing I'll just think it's expert
yeah it's really well done and perfectly
sums up the Joker he's do you smiling
but you know there's something in his
eye as well that's very like broken and
it's great that we when we get this
flash back to his past we think we see
exactly why he's crazy yeah and I think
some of the best drawing happens in this
initial flashback yeah I think the
facial you know
depressions is particularly off the
Joker the reflections his dejection you
know the sheer emotion that is wrung out
of this scene through the writing and
the paneling is is just terrific like so
affecting I find it yeah
art incredible um and it's a shame that
DC have never confirmed exactly what the
Joker's origin story is because this one
works so well but I do kind of get why
they won't keep it mysterious you know
it provides a lot of a lure for the
character even though they've decided it
certainly say that there's three Joker's
which it doesn't make any sense because
surely Batman wouldn't realize Pinocchio
maybe one of the Joker's is that guy in
the prison cell yeah maybe just for five
minutes
where was the Joker once Alfred he you
know he's trying to be a stand-up
comedian this guy he messed up the punch
line which is you know not the thing you
really want to do yeah I think
especially the bottom left where you see
is you know his fists clenched the agony
on his face and in the deluxe edition
you know it's colored a little
differently to the standard one it's
kind of more muted we just have the one
singular piece of color and all the
scenes yeah which I don't know why that
I don't know what it symbolizes right um
to be honest like do you have any not
especially no I mean against it it
starts off very muted pink and but and
then it goes for a darker red and it
slowly gets more red as we go on but you
know is the Joker's color red primarily
well well Tim sail in the intros
actually speaks about this briefly says
quote Boland washes out all color in a
caption but chooses a spotlight an
object in each a bowl of tentacles red
Floyd paper and so on in increasingly
intensity strange shades of red all
leading up to the Red Hood that was
positively the Joker's most forgotten
origin way back in 1951 so apparently
that's the thinking behind it right it's
not necessarily needed but yes or I had
don't avoid tim sales doing the
introduction enough not Brian Bolland
but Tim sells a brilliant artist minted
Batman along Halloween which is actually
my favorite bamberg right and but on a
wise kinda it's not a definitive answer
if he does it to me so hmm
and there you know the try on the model
that we saw earlier becomes yeah one
that Joker reaches out to that's that's
an incredible panel yet again I feel you
know more more does this in his sleep
juxtaposition as we always say going
from one thing to the other
yeah and realize a third thing and I
think him reaching out into his own
reflection in the body of a classic
vaudeville crown it's just a
ridiculously good yeah
and I like how the Joker was never funny
in real life yeah he's sort of a failed
comedian and that's why it's turned a
crime Ron it's just a nice it's nice a
back nice background he still thinks
he's funny and but no one else does
which is you know the Joker and the
Joker you know puts pay to the guy
renting him out yeah carnival it's I
don't know if the panelling here's
exceptional really cuz in the second he
goes for a hand shaking them in the
third you don't know if he's I guess
he's adjusting after going for it and
killed the going straight away with you
what I don't look at not unless arranged
with something loaded in it well it's
just the old classic like clown
handshake isn't it where they
electrocute someone and yeah just a nice
little thing way that the Joker would
kill you by shaking your hand on the
deal even though he's already made it
and the guy gets left with it's horrible
rictus grin which a lot of the the Joker
victims are famous for having and it's a
very haunting way to die you know you
just dead but you're smiling um yeah and
I quite like it yeah and you know the
language of a clown the gesture the way
they work in innuendos is perfect for
the way more rights as well you'll be
left absolutely speechless it's a
lifetime guarantee and you do feel to
stick around
like you know it's just all over the
thing I just figured so well done yeah
and it's exactly like what the Joker
would say it's almost a culmination of
his best lines in in one sentence which
very few writers are able to do a lot
the time the Joker he says a lot of
things but they're not funny they're not
punchlines whereas this is all building
towards the joke and which it happens
again when he attacks Barbara Gordon
later on so it's nice that mores written
the Joker in a way that's very comedic
um and more we always say has a dark
sense of humor
so it's great that he gets to develop a
character that also has won a lot of his
characters sort of he imposes this sense
of humor on them
and they don't realize they're being
funny
it's very an unintentional but here he's
got free rein to do what he wants so a
lot of the work a lot of the lines that
come out from the Joker are punchlines
and jokes and Batman's in his Batcave
which you know we saw back in doomsday
issue - let's not forget that incredible
piece of comic literature get a gues
Killing Joke sequel dungeons yes that's
what that'll happen next that you know I
think that on the wiki this loads of
like sort of like yeah there's a comic
issue that picked up but nothing's by
more now I know what boys like for doing
sequels oh I've got no ideas I've got my
dears on to the next one
and they're like but words making so
much money we need to do it first part
Geoff Johns on it he's great at stealing
people's work and getting high praise
for it don't slag off dude I've seen
someone write on Twitter the other day
that Doomsday Clock issue 2 is 5 out of
5 Wow one of the best comic books ever
written ever you've not read Watchmen if
you said that but we seem to be the only
ones slugging it off but anyway check
out our Doomsday Clock review if you
want to hear to Island more fanboys
crying about how change is bad we're
selling really Star Wars fans no it's
I didn't like last year died I mean we
don't necessarily need to talk about
that but I wasn't I wasn't really a fan
but no that would be incredible if we
got Alan Moore on the show finally and
the first thing we ask is when you're
doing Killing Joke - yeah and he's just
like oh no I wanted to control its
features why yeah comment tree get him
on yeah it would be no no we talked
about my bully him into doing it yeah
he's in the Batcave but see the dinosaur
we see the Queen we see the Joker and
you know there's nothing this guy knows
about him nothing he knows about how
many years at this point he's been
trying to find information what the
Joker is clearly like a ghost you know
he's kind of impossible to put down the
family photo of the bat crew as a bat
fan is that is that warm to see yeah
that's quite nice they've got bat-mite
there which I don't know if you know
that caramel but it's like a fifth
dimensional the magic being that can fly
and disappear and stuff he's a bit bit
mental it's a bit it's a very weird
creation
not many people tend to use him very
well
Graham Morrison actually does a
brilliant device with him where he makes
him a hallucination and Batman's right
so basically yeah Batman our IP we're
gonna go on a massive Batman tangent
here but in Batman our IP and Grant
Morrison has he'd been building it for a
while at this shadowy organization were
following him and they'd also in will
trade his life through a silver st.
cloud I think it was I think that's as
bad anyway Jezebel jet right it's just
love that it's this woman that you fell
in love with and then they just break
him down psychologically throughout the
book they've beaten placing trigger
words called Zoomer and R which is sort
of like the last thing that Thomas Wayne
said to Bruce was they after they saw
the mask of zorro was they would put
someone like sorrow in Arkham so zero
and Arkham broken down becomes zero nos
and that becomes a trigger word for him
traumatically to go back to
I'm going on a massive tangent here
anyway they infiltrate the Batcave they
inject Bruce were heroin they like use
this trigger were to send them back into
a regressive state and bat-mite becomes
a hallucination of his like inner inner
self and beta that we learn that Bruce
Wayne's so prepared for any eventuality
that he's actually developed a split
personality that will take over if he
ever gets psychologically attacked and
he just he regresses into this alter ego
that he's created and becomes the Batman
of sewer and our and he's aided by
bat-mite who some would say that Luther
nation some wouldn't we can cut that
entire section from the problem no no
there are seven bat-mite vans in Poland
that are going crazy right now so sad to
those guys we get butchered that as well
it's a man has so much law in comic
books I can't remember any of it so you
know praise be to you but we get a lot
of Joker's mouths as well here on my
screens above we get a lot of sort of
you know mastication I should say and
Alfred comes in there's more mouths that
we see for our Alfred such a classic but
Lawrence unless I forget that you know
with the toast and the tea and you know
the way we get Batman as well is very
80s and he's an incredibly mostly
athletic specimen yeah he's just like
he's in the prime of his life both
physically and mentally he's a genius
level he's the second smartest man in
the world as we learned oh yeah yeah and
it's just it's just great yeah and you
know he looks over surveys he's kind of
looking at his mouth again never you
know what he's looking out at the
screens but you still trying to get to
know how can two people hate so much
about knowing each other he asks yeah
you know which is quite a poignant point
and not the most graceful transition is
him saying how can people hate each
other and then someone saying I hate
this and then we learned that we're in
the Gordon household yeah you know more
can be a little bit more delicate with
that but still we get here we get the
cuttings and I especially like well the
whole thing about the pasting the
scrapbook becomes relevant quite soon
when
Barbara shot body crashes into it and
chronic young folks himself as a memory
there in this lovely apartment of all
these artifacts and the drinks cabinet
cetera but seeing that picture of Batman
at the top left at the bottom left sorry
isn't that like the first cover of
Batman's appearance on comics yes it is
yet Batman 20 year sorry Detective
Comics 27
it's just a nice homage to that and yeah
that's just you know it's nice that he
connects everything all together whereas
Batman if you ever go back and read that
issue you'll see that not really much
like Donnie's now because I'm murdering
everyone Wow okay it's quite funny
though it's basically Bruce Wayne
sitting down with Commissioner Gordon
having a chat and then Gordon has to
rush off to solve these murders and
Batman's there and then you go alright
well who Batman's a great guy and then
at the end it's like this hilarious
reveal where it's like little did you
know read little did Gordon know readers
that the man he's been talking with this
entire time is and then Bruce Wayne
sought walks in who were covered in the
cupboard door closes and then it opens
in because Batman he's in like the full
costume you know it's a bit [ __ ] bring
bring bring it back to where the [ __ ]
at last in a living room that's what
readers want to see bring it back to him
get in his back broken awesome yeah you
know but yeah it's like the thirties I
don't know in Batman's die but long time
ago so you know it's a benign good God
so so yeah you know we get as you as you
just teased one of the most horrific
events of the comic a real you know
indictment against Joker my knowledge of
Joker stories isn't huge if you want to
point to sort of horrific act he's done
it's a knock a door open in sort of you
know Hawaiian tourist garb which a gun
loaded pointed straight ready to disable
and possibly more this section without
any text in which Barbara gets shot and
then thrown onto the table everything
from just seeing you know her father
with the scissors behind in the steaming
coffee and yeah the crash in the
physical agony of her is palpable
and it's got no dialogue in it again
just
the oak I do wish I could read this with
fresh eyes but it's pretty much as
famous to me at least as the you know
Darth Vader being Luke Skywalker's
father
spoiler alert and everyone knows that
twisted it's been recreated and used in
almost all Batman media so it's very
hard to be with fresh eyes but it is
it's still as shocking as ever and it's
beautifully orchestrated by more you
know if you can tell the tone completely
changes not only in the book but the DC
Universe itself it's completely I don't
know where when the turn just grabs your
attention immediately to me this is sort
of the moment when comics grew up so
gone were the days of Adam West and Burt
Ward you know this wasn't Batman
fighting aliens on Mars anymore this was
the Joker showing up to where you live
not killing you paralyzing you and
humiliating you
and then Tritonal and kidnapping you
father it's very yeah it's just it's
it's beautiful but it's horrifying as
well this is no longer a villain in a
lair or at the dock this is in your
house where you live out of the costume
it's just horrendous and it's a very
controversial motif like Merle went to
the editor of DC originally and pitched
it thinking that the idea wouldn't get
approved or if it did that this book
would be in else world book but the
editor actually apparently said [ __ ]
the [ __ ] she went yeah [ __ ] the VHD
and I ran and and I think more he often
cites this is one of his worst works and
I think he regrets this as yeah it's
just that I think he thinks it's very
sexist and misogynistic that this man
exerts such a power over this helpless
woman but it is a great piece of work
and more you should go back and read it
and but you know obviously Allen will
hates everything he's ever done yeah he
does he does and yeah it's just it's
gruesome
yeah thing especially the aftermath of
the shot I mean not only the father
going over to her only visible is a
mouth yet again and we see Joker smiling
in the corner and Joker placed Joker
like Joker is just crippled this woman
you're gonna go on to do much more but
he pours a drink he admires it as his
goons you know take care of the other
threat in the room yeah and to him you
know for him to grab the dress and to
pull it down and then to say to prove a
point cleanest to crime you can see in
his hand you know part of the fabric
coming apart and the glitter and he it's
just it's so horrific it like it's so
clear but it's brilliant like it's just
such a distillation of his character
yeah can you imagine little Timmy eight
years old his mum's got me some Batman
comics he's reading through he's reading
through you're like Batman versus the
mad scientist and then he gets to this
one it just completely changes the
aesthetic of everything and was more
regrets it I am glad that this is in the
book because it the character Barbara
Gordon goes on to become Oracle right
which is sort of Batman's eyes and ears
I don't know if you've seen spider-man
homecoming Tom and but one of the one of
spider-man's friends is just like I want
to be a guy in a chair who just like
whizzes round on computers find it now
everything and that is pretty much
Oracle and so it's very empowering to me
for disabled people it has since the new
52 it was retconned in barbara gordon
can walk again but hugely shook up
comics at the time and it's it's
harrowing it's a very it's probably one
of the most important moments in Batman
comics ever mm-hmm and it's beautifully
illustrated beautifully paced
beautifully acted out yeah yeah it was
great and in Joker again you know place
the mores advantages he does those
double turns when he's comparing her to
a book you know she thinks she's a
coffee table addition his wife says
after he shot her which is it is very
clever thing to say but it's just such a
menacing thing to say can't say much for
the volumes condition there's a hole in
the jacket and the spine appears to be
damaged yeah which is again
flaring off his dark sense of humor and
it's the lads killing it yeah yes the
greatest of all time and I love that you
still don't know anything about the
Joker um like we uh didn't really talk
about this earlier before but I'm gonna
kind of go back on my notes a bit so
when when they were in the Batcave
Batman sort of struggles that to come to
terms with how two people can hate each
other without even knowing the identity
of one another but they do know each
other like Joker knows that Batman
exists and Batman knows that the Joker
exists everything else is just noise
that gets in the way of the stark
contrast between both characters and
it's nice that they they cover this
identity when we get the flash-forward
and because it to me it sort of got me
thinking like what if the Joker does
have a secret identity that we've never
known about much in the same way that
Batman does and throughout the day sort
of goes out in his normal clothes and
acts like a normal person and it really
does speak volumes to Moore's work like
he enables the readers to think for
himself whilst taking in it taking the
characters and exciting directions and
and it's nice that we do get this
backstory you've you've just went from
one of the most horrific things in
comics to one of the most mundane things
where it's just the Joker sitting eating
shrimp in a bar yeah and it's nice that
you can see the the polar opposites of
this character and it makes it more
intriguing because you're now thinking
what drove this man to become so evil
and yeah did the flashbacks fantastic as
well all the details in the bar all the
drunks lollygagging in the deluxe
edition we are getting the shrimp as the
red here which is kind of pilfered by
these men and that closing panel of the
shrimp making the flick sound and him
like pulling out a tentacle but there's
something quite intimate and painful
about that that I think resonates really
really well and the the plan is afoot
here we learn about his sort of you know
chemical factory past and he's you know
current future
the comedian Britain's seen that way
he's gonna be wearing the Red Hood
I mean death is a Batman historian what
importance is the Red Hood
are they red hoods massively important
um the Joker
after he kills Jason Todd and Jason Todd
was out the comics for four decades and
he came back under the moniker of Red
Hood to sort of signify this it just
appears throughout even Gotham which I
don't like the Gotham TV show but they
do play up the fact that there's Red
Hood in Gotham and it's it's a mask that
criminals used to kind of act much in
the same way an organization in our
world
anonymous also of going to the the
moniker of the V for Vendetta mask which
sort of ties it back to more a bit yeah
it's it's just a moniker that in the
early years of Gotham existed and
criminals used it as a way to appear as
one entity much in the same way that
Batman does so it's it very nicely
juxtaposed as this um yeah and it's just
it's just nice who actually did see on
YouTube with the other day we've got
will first juxtaposition comment oh
really good you know just got a comment
saying juxtaposition so sure odds that
guy I'm sorry I haven't took it you
username but you know who you are and I
just want to say thank you and yeah made
his chuckle let the Joker is forced into
this vision I just noticed something as
we always do deaf when we go for these
comics we always noticed things that we
never seen before um just before the
panel of the other sort of the shrimp
face up is that the UM is that the
penguin there the table yeah it looks
like doesn't it no no what's that before
yeah could be could be uh I'm sure it is
we get the dog down below so very Alan
Morris schnapps not cloth like you has a
fantastic all the sounds in this a gray
of all of this you know this so that in
crisp click straight you know Greek
there's lots of really good stuff here
and we learn yeah it's nice that more is
using this prawn there the shrimp's are
getting pulled apart and you know it's
held in that mobsters hand and he's just
doing whatever he wants to it much in
the same way that the mobsters are doing
the exact same thing to the Joker
they've got complete control of his life
now deciding whether he lived or dies
and you know then we meet Barbara in the
hospital Batman's there who's this
detective is he a Batman feature yeah I
think it's Harvey Bullock which he's
massively in the Batman animated series
and it doesn't appear that often in the
comics more than stuff like Gotham
Central but he's sort of like the go-to
he's the second in command to
Commissioner Gordon he's massively in
no-man's land he you know he's just a
great background character like if you
watch the cartoon you need instant you
recognize him and yeah it's just a
staple of the Batman universe so it's
nice to see him make an appearance in
one of the most famous Batman graphic
novels yeah love his appearance in the
bottom left as well you know the cigar
the show the tie is the [ __ ] hair like
you know everything about him is just
really well designed against the cast
iron of Batman who you know you know
just quite disturbingly Barbara awaking
you know from this deep sleep and she's
just in pure terror
really not even for her own condition
but for our fathers in the Joker's hand
yeah she's waking up in a nightmare
basically and again that pulls back to
the DC Comics changing over all she's
just woken up and you know gone are the
days of going out and capturing
criminals and tying them up to lampposts
and leaving notes this is like horrific
it wasn't meant to go this far but it
has and she just wants to go back but
it's irreversible
yeah just the drawings yeah again I
think a fantastic the way Batman's
reaching out to her saying his Bruce as
well which kind of you know Cassie on a
certain level her gripping is okay which
you would do like you know you just grab
someone if you're an emotional territory
and if they're wearing costume yeah you
will just kind of handle them this way
and again they're just the the
physicalness of Batman you know is pure
heroic Greek myth status then we click
into the carnival which has yeah pretty
upsetting cysts again if little Timmy
reading it's nice how it's nice how this
scene opens on much in the same way the
Cape was gripped and the adult the phone
the funhouse I don't I want to be as PC
as possible here Tom because I don't
want to offend all three of our
listeners in case one of them is but
they're very demonic these almost
children like oh yeah like babies ma'am
I don't know what they are yeah don't I
really don't know what they are they're
loud they're sort of like dwarvish yeah
impish but yeah they're crazy they're
scary if I woke up and seen them three
leading ovaries I've been like [ __ ]
hell Dennis to that Hospital yeah I'd
rather be paralyzed
he's de clothed we get the angle from
him on the floor in the second panel of
them leering over their eyes just
transfixed all all very alarming really
we see the guy on the stat on the
elephant ride yet again you know he
hasn't really moved an inch there we see
a lot of the freaks as well I mean one
of the freaks is like a complete cousin
it like giant third person yeah look so
too bad yeah yeah it was yeah the giant
fat woman and you know the twins etc and
that image of Joker you're going mad the
children's heads on sticks burning yeah
the the pulse that the rollercoaster
casting constellations behind it lending
it this kind of mythic import the way
he's sitting in the half saucer it's
just II you know it's just so it's so
impressive yeah it's a massive another
grand entrance by the Joker every time
you sort of appears in this comic it's
very grandiose and this is definitely
one of the most memorable it's just like
even just the way he's sitting it's it's
very sort of twisted and unhuman like
the proportions are whilst they look
great you kind of wonder how they would
actually be correct
his legs look absolutely massive and it
just gives you this whole twisted
feeling that you know in a funhouse and
you know mayhem is the law mm-hmm and
this is his quest really
and it's very Alan Moore esque you know
pitting yourself against his psyche
understanding who you really are
it wasn't gonna be a standard sort of
Batman villain sort of story it was
gonna be one of these you know trips
into Dante's Inferno to a suggest and it
is just wonderfully done even just the
paneling as well the left panel with
Joker's voice coming up from the bottom
and then the switch of perspective so
looking straight up at him yeah I think
is terrific Lee done his minions shoving
him on the floor the puddles I thought
of what I can't imagine what really on
this you know horrific nightmare scape I
would like yeah these pallets I would
hate to be there
it would I'd really no enjoy it and you
know we move on and you know things are
explained the idea of having multiple
pasts the idea of contracting
rationality itself there is no sanity
clause he says get him onto this
fairground ride and yes oh my god how
tense when it ends and we flashback yeah
it's like if you really wouldn't know
what could be in there and and I love
like again was wit when he's talking
about how thinking about the past can be
worrying and anxious he calls it the
past tense and it really is some of the
best singers by the Joker and it's a
perfect way to end this
you know scenario where we just see
madness is gonna take over and I loved
the way that throughout this the Joker
is sort of the king the way he sits on
his throne you're in the land of madness
and so you must be mad
you must go mad to fit in here Gordon
and I'm your king and we're gonna we're
gonna send you on a ride and then see
how you like it yeah the Train of four
yeah no you should strip nude as well
which again yes it's quite brave I
suppose like you know and it's just
quite unseemly and Varion settling
especially these children tying him in
him the door closing madness is the
emergency exit and I mean you know which
ties beautifully into the flashback the
idea of you know man that can come
quickly and abruptly you really don't
know what's gonna happen around the
corner and him learning about the death
you know of his wife and therefore his
unborn child and his static motion is
built explicitly those bottom three
panels obviously his eyes isn't it
you've never feel his being punched in
the gut his life has been turned upside
down yeah it's absolutely incredible so
well drawn and in the balan does so much
with so little and I've seen it's pretty
much the same panel three times yeah but
the facial expression just changes ever
so slightly in the arm positions change
nothing else does and it's incredible
that Balin manages to convey such
emotion throughout three panels without
doing anything really other than drawing
it three times yeah yeah it's just even
you know you look at the slight wrinkles
on the suits which inform you know he's
kind of hunched up nature and the
picture that they get shown of which
eventually draws into the Joker the two
in front
reminds me of American Gothic by Grant
Wood the sort of iconic painting then if
Moore was going for that because it is
really just two people standing for a
photo so it could really be anything but
you know nice little things that when
the cops come over and the wiseguys and
their hats you know which is kind of you
know I guess what you do but it has a
kind of comic nurse to it and all the
nature that I love but yeah him lighting
the cigarette as he takes the
realization the routine this of this for
an officer the devastation of this yeah
an individual is just captured you know
just truly brilliantly like you know
when you read these things and you just
they they always stick with you I've
always been wowed by this sequence yeah
and it's not some you know our deaths
not some blaze of glory
like the wreck the Wayne's was it was
just an electrocution on a on a baby
bottle here no he lost his wife and kids
for for no real reason
yeah
it was just a freak accident and it was
just chaos which of course symbolizes
the Joker and it's a horrible it's
almost unreal like if you imagine this
happening to yourself you wouldn't
believe it but you think it was a joke
at first yeah and you can just see this
guy's totally broken down but he's got
this obligation to appear in this
robbery um and it's just you can feel
just the life sucked out of them yeah no
buts he is you know forced into this
unfortunately no exceptions you know he
gets the picture and just closing on
again the way Bolin captures just pure
despair pure loss of anything and the
jokes at his corner as well the man in
the masked hat sort of smiling at him
yes it works you know it's a little bit
arch but I think it works you need the
panel's to have these interesting
motions here and even like the empty the
glass of empty water in front of him as
well like you know does that see
probably does symbolize something in
some way but going from glasses half
full drag it's not even half full
anymore empty that's why you don't do
research Tom just never do it and you
know we morph into Gordon in the same
way going through and Joker his command
of technology is impressive his keys
control of these screens mm-hmm yeah I
wasn't thinking that when I wrote it but
I suppose you're right yeah he's got you
should be an electrician this lad you
should be doing lights and projections
and stuff he could do anything is guy
he's like Roger Deakins or someone like
that yeah that's why you should that's
what Batman should say at the end he
shouldn't kill him he should be like oh
I seen you your funhouse ride mate you
know you'd actually make a pretty good
fun house operator have you thought
about taking us on the road ID your
connections
I know Dick Grayson or the Gotham pet
robot just the one though yeah and it's
just yeah all of this is so brilliant
the Joker just espousing you know the
benefits of losing your mind and letting
yeah you know trade the gloom for a
rubber room and injections twice a day
and the way he's dancing as well his
legs cocked his hat you know it's very
Gene Kelly and yeah this section then
goes into possibly the one of the most
controversial comic book sections ever
certainly like a very popular comic book
that he's sold you know waterstones in
book shops it's not like a niche thing
everyone knows about The Killing Joke um
the pictures of Barbra yeah um and it
some people take this as you sexually
molested her um but I don't know I've
never read that far into it and but it
is imagine just seeing you naked
paralyzed daughter like it's not nice
no it's what it's there it's not you
know it's not the typical villain plan
of kidnapping the daughter and tying it
to a rope and dangling it over a pool of
piranhas it's pretty much just like know
just touch a shot and took photos of her
it's more simplistic but it's much more
evil it's not elaborate it's just it's
pretty [ __ ] up very [ __ ] up yeah the
design of the paneling is great
initially we see there's four shot show
but you only really see free one of them
just all flesh and they are you know
they are really hard to look at
am I wrong in seeing on the sort of the
image that he's screaming out with her
on her back you can sort of see just the
beginning of a nipple on the edge of the
panel at the left yeah but maybe I'm
just a but that feels like certain more
wood do you know what I mean or sit or
maybe one of his artists would do but it
is just oh my god like it's despicable
yeah just messed up yeah it's a the
Joker's crossed a line and now you're
sort of thinking right you see stepped
over this is Batman I'm gonna go kill
the lad yeah yeah it's and the way he
pops out at the paneling as well he's
always his teeth don't get even get mad
you know and and the fact that the you
know the children trying to push him
down as well as we can't see and then we
cut too it's a little bit of Hope a
little
momentum in terms of the heroic pursue
Batman so basically trying to find Joker
yet again yeah it's great how he's
interrogating all these criminals even
the penguin even pops up there and he's
just terrifying them he wants to he's
desperate to get to the bottom of this
yeah it's just it's really nice and it's
good how Batman doesn't actually find
the Joker the Joker wants to be found
so he sends this ticket to Batman for
the carnival just admit one and it's got
with compliments and it's a little
Joker's face so Batman might have never
ever caught the Joker um but it's it's
sort of the reverse way the the villain
wants to be caught because he's like
look I've done my work now I've already
won and come and see ya and it just the
Commissioner comes through the Train as
you know all of this progresses through
and gets out and you know the Joker is
just kind of just is anyone home he says
you know which year starting his eyes
are like disco balls and they gots plots
in the man he seems to just kind of not
really react but but what he's done here
is so sophisticated I reckon it could
break the majority of people I
definitely if it was anyone other than
Commissioner Gordon it would definitely
break them but yeah Gordon is the best
of us I mean even Gotham couldn't break
him right he first moved here and he's
person moved here and when he moved
there and saw all the corruption he just
yeah even that didn't break him so he's
much like Batman in a way that he can't
be broken and he's infallible he's one
of the the most underrated heroes in the
Batman universe but he's just as much a
hero if not more than Batman is because
he puts his life on the line like
villains can show up to his house and
shoot his daughter and there's no hidden
side to him so yeah I think you would
survive it but not no one else would
know and you know the Joker Basie puts
him away to reflect upon life and always
random injustice
as he's you know reflecting himself and
then of course we go back again to the
whole Red Hood stuff which i think is
fantastic
you know the realities of this life were
explored him putting on the hood finding
it difficult to breathe hard to see of
course there would be these
constrictions and it is effectively you
know a goose for the police officers to
follow and you know things move quickly
and they are discovered and Red Hood is
the only one who survives and there's
some pretty gruesome headshots
oh yeah hurry yeah they always kind of
stood out to me just the way they had
sprayed with bullets and it's just like
yeah horrendous yeah yeah and you know
he runs away in what could be construed
as some sort of grand escape but
obviously just a man who's terrified you
know who's escaping who is alumina in
these black and white times which is
before Schindler's List I believe that
did something similar oh yeah maybe I
don't know maybe these been done before
I'm sure but you know it was quite
interesting to see and Batman arrives
but an early Batman and you know Batman
who isn't so police cooperative perhaps
at this sense who's kind of finding his
feet it's quite exciting to see him in
the flashback yeah it's nice how he's
sort of his first line it's like so Red
Hood we meet again
yeah like we meet again is pretty much
like the the archetype entrance of a
hero am saying that we've faced off many
times before and it's yeah it's just a
nice you know it's the perfect
symbolization of a hero showing up and
it's nice that we see it from the red
hoods perspective of just how terrifying
Batman would be and showing up and he's
just gonna kick the crap out yeah
so naturally it jumps over the edge even
though it probably would have been safer
to just hand himself in yeah and he
falls in Joker water like what is it I
think it's just chemical output the
chemical and processing plant ace
chemicals is like a staple of the Batman
universe as well so yeah it's nice to
see this show up Joker's origins mm-hmm
yeah definitely and you know he becomes
you know the
it effectively takes off the hood dot
the green hair the makeup all of the
changes we get his gloves kind of look
like Mickey Mouse gloves yeah and it's
nice that this you know red hood
costumes kind of came out and it's it
sort of inspired the way the Joker's
costumes gonna go down the line and just
seeing his reflection just completely
breaks um he's now became this clown and
he realizes how much you know he he's
been looking at the world and how funny
it is but now he sees it reflected back
in himself and it's just great to see
this yeah entirely and we get all the
freaks laughing at Gordon who is in his
cage I love how the Hannah has block out
the whole background yeah there was like
a circus tent you get all the freaks get
a good shot there Joker has his audience
and your Batman arrives which is yeah
you know inevitable you know we need
this Shakespearean conflict to come to a
close for certain we see the guy on the
elephant sitting there half dead and
Batman coming in this something I
started keep saying 80s but you know I
mean there's something sort of plastic
era about yeah he's silhouette here tree
animate series I suppose before he came
out yeah and the Batmobile itself it's a
very old one at the time you know the
Batmobile had been modernized quite
heavily but it's nice that more decides
to use the older design of it it sort of
signifies that the past and an order
meeting with the future which is
inevitably what the Joker saw wants to
introduce to Batman psyche wants to say
know you've lived in this world where
everything's perfect and there's right
and wrong but I'm gonna introduce this
this idea for the future that
everything's crazy and it's a great you
know it's a great meeting of the two and
symbolized within this car yeah and and
the poor joint fat woman is running out
of the way hoping to get there and just
all the details terrific you can even
see Gotham in the background with
skyscrapers so it's just on the
outskirts this is the reflection yet
again this time of the fairground rides
and this always happens I love that you
see all the fruits running away when you
see Joker just standing there as well
yeah that's another thing I don't think
I noticed that before whatever reason
but seeing Batman climb out hello I came
to talk we have this echoing you know
I'm going the forward but there's just
some ink you know it's one of the rare
things in fiction is a Batman and Joker
it's one of those eternal rivalries but
it's just always satisfying yeah and
it's great to see here that the two of
it bringing up the the speech from the
beginning I've been thinking lately
about you about me about what's gonna
happen to us in the end we're gonna end
up killing each other wrongly which is
of course what happens in this book even
though it doesn't explicitly say I am i
do think that Batman does kill the Joker
okay and then you know that it's just
it's nice that more brings up the the
first bit of dialogue um but it's it's
not Batman saying it he's just thinking
it and it went past that point where
he's ever gonna vocalize it to the Joker
he's just here to act and the Joker you
know has Joker's type attacks he sprays
him with his horrible you know acid
though then we see Batman sort of
treating with antidote he has on him
there's something very inevitable about
so much yes him running away to his lair
as well you know Batman following Jim is
retrieved outward and Batman learns more
about where we are to this extent you
know trying to change him the fact that
he wants him brought in by the book as
well very honorable yeah definitely and
gone you know it's the police'
Commission he's the Commissioner of
Police he could easily just kill the lad
he could just be late you know what just
do what you want me I'm sick of them but
he still excuses them because he knows
the law is right I have to show them
that Holloway works yeah he powers on
through Batman we can see his exposed
arm now with the boils on them which I
love yeah the Hall of Mirrors which is
effectively Joker's face the spike pit
which is coated with something as well
but the spike pit it's a very classic
villain sort of sixties thing isn't it
like hanging yeah like
yeah it's just it's nice that you know
the Hall of Mirrors it's it's got to a
point now it's very on the nose for
villains and heroes to face off in Hall
of Mirrors the first time I can remember
seeing it was an end of the Dragon
they've also done it in the Dark Knight
Returns except for in the Dark Knight
Returns so then escalates slightly and
ends in the tunnel of love so it goes
from this Hall of Mirrors where Batman
and Robin symbolically sorry Batman and
the Joker are symbolically reflecting
each other and then they go the tunnel
of love which is where the relationship
ends um more rarely seems to copy though
so I'll give them the benefit of the
doubt and but it's just the monologue
within this hall of mirrors is good
enough to for me to just look over
everything that I might think you know
my thing is a negative and just talking
about how do you know how many times
we've come close to World War 3 over a
flock of geese on a computer screen it's
very clearly influenced the Dark Knight
the eminent Joker does a similar
monologue to to two-face in the hospital
and it's great they just he makes it so
the world's like this monstrous gag and
then he's asking why Batman can't see
the funny side mmm they burst through
and goes because I've heard it before
and it wasn't funny the first time I was
my Batman impression
DC hit me up yeah if you need an
animated voice yeah or I've been doing
the weights Tom or if you need someone
to replace Ben Affleck just don't just
put it out there now I charge a lot less
than Ben Affleck does mate I tell you
that one for free
wait the way Joker looks as well you
know when he says what I see the funny
side you know it looks like 10-15 years
younger he looks like how he looked you
know beforehand he resumed its horrified
child is yeah yeah just kind of faced
with this horrible existential Glee and
even the top right panel where you see
them sort of marching from below and you
get to appreciate a visage of who he is
with the ribbon and
you know just all fantastic joke about
culminating as you say in the crash
through the glass which I love sort of
crash through the panel as well itself
you know yeah it's it's all very well
done very classic him coming through him
grabbing the Joker then facing off in
some pretty compelling combat where I
love when he grabs the mask for the two
eyes as well yes like again quite goofy
quite Cesar Romero esque but in a modern
tinge it works
yeah it's great and yeah it just
completely blinds him and I'm surprised
no one had ever done it to Batman before
they do it and watch him and don't know
they talk about the mask being pulled
down over someone's eyes yeah let's
started gluing on instead and I think it
was the original night howl let's set it
yeah don't make sure you on the bill I
think guys cape stuck in the yeah yeah
yeah they like cut costumes are quite
goofy and they literally only work in
comics and movies and all cartoons
so yeah it's nice that Moore's realized
that and he's like well yeah this is
what would happen if a villain did fight
Batman in real life but it's also nice
that Batman easily bests the Joker hunt
hand like it does my head in in comics
Tom when the Batman and Joker have a
fight in the like they equally matched
likeness and the joke has he's not he's
not on that level at all it's quite good
that they do in Arkham City when
eventually you get to the Joker and you
have a hand a hand fight with him and
you just completely you Bray the lad
Bray for our American listeners just
means to to kick the [ __ ] oh yeah and
you see the culmination really which I
like you see the boil from before his
mask gets hit in his eyes he gets hit
over the head
you know clunked with heavy wooden bat
which isn't nice and then a knife he
runs out which he defends and when
eventually he does get his hands on the
joke like you say he does deal then
quite easily punches him out of building
Batman tells all those problems just by
bunching them
it's nice that you salts this week too
and you know we have a revisitation of
joke of a gun you know could he
paralyzed Batman similar to Barbara but
no it'sit's a joke gun here and Joker
sort of accepts defeat to a certain
level but then Batman opens up the
dialogue again yeah but he says that
we're running out of alternatives and we
both know it maybe this is our last
chance to sort this bloody mess out and
if you don't take it well well locked on
the suicide course I'm going to come
upon my voice for this both of us to the
death and the Oscar and the Oscar for
Best Batman comes to it very much we see
the rain on Joker's chin similar to
Batman's chin
yeah these similarities do run through I
like how you just started ignoring my
jokes and just not know they're mad
everyone hears them and then you know we
get the joke that effectively ends the
thing they were Killing Joke The Killing
Joke I mean a lot of people still don't
quite understand what is meant by
Joker's joke you know what I mean it can
be interpreted to way so do you want it
I've got red now do you want to read it
or should I I think people are probably
sicker hearing my voice no no no please
read it man please okay I'm not gonna
bother doing the Joker voice see there
were these two guys in the lunatic
asylum and one night one night they
decide they don't like living in the
asylum any more they decide they're
going to escape so like the way so it's
gonna be terribly told this so like they
get up on the roof and they're just
across this narrow gap they see two
rooftops they see the rooftops of the
town stretching away in the moonlight
stretching to freedom now the first guy
he jumps right across with no problem
but his friend his friend didn't dare
make the leap you see he's afraid of
falling so then the first guy has an
idea he says hey I've made a flashlight
I had my flashlight [ __ ] hell
basically I have my flashlight with me
I'll shine it across the gap between the
buildings you can walk across the beam
and join me but the second guy just
shakes his head he says what you think I
am crazy you turn it off when I was
halfway across obviously I'm never gonna
share telling jokes all good you've
obviously you've been listening to the
podcast you know that already we should
let you tell it no it's all good Bobby
like how do you read the meaning of that
and so it's difficult to decide which
one is Batman and which one is the Joker
in this anecdote so is Batman the one
trying to shine the light and the
Joker's too scared to jump across or his
the Joker showing Batman that you know
Batman's in fact insane but you won't
admit it to himself um you know it is
really nice like how do you take it yeah
I think I think the same way yeah I
think just the both of them it's not
clear who's leading who across the path
yeah none of them are gonna lead them
fully across and you know we we end with
one of my favorite endings of anything
really I love the ending in The Killing
Joke because he can be taken so many
ways seeing that unless someone tells
the joke terribly and what no no written
terribly because it all has the Joker
isms in it it's not quite you know it's
not quite clear but I mean the fact that
the laughing ends you take that as death
yes I'll take that as Batman's killed
the Joker and which Grant Morrison also
backed up yeah he said that people don't
seem to realize it's called The Killing
Joke because it's the joke that makes
Batman kill the Joker so back up Batman
there Fatman on Batman
the brilliant interview with Grant
Morrison why he discusses this in a lot
more detail and but I definitely do take
it as Batman kills the Joker and you can
sort of see this by the fact that
laughing stops it as well yeah so yeah
it's it's it's just
was just the silence to it and he's got
he's clearly Batman clearly got his
hands around the Joker's throat and then
you can see in the next panel that the
jogger saw kneeling down and then the
laughter just stops they handle it quite
well in the animated movie yeah and I
come to the same conclusion watching
that and of course Jeff Jones has
decided all of a sudden that we've now
got three Joker's so this could have
been the first right right hey Batman
kills him and then he just represses the
memory and I mean the argument that it
ends and starts with the rain as if
nothing changes does that not hold
weight for you know
it is kind of a it's kind of a permanent
more thing isn't it
he's doing that sort of stuff so yeah I
think I'm with you I think the Joker's
probably been killed yeah it's yeah it
is called the [ __ ] killing joke so
it's kind of yeah and it's something
more would do something he did like a
weekend at Bernie's with the Joker when
he brought the body out and Gordon was
there like it's okay see is he all right
he's Batman she was like nodding his
head corny I'm crying I still put his
thumb under his chin and makes his lips
moving come on quick I've never been
better
sorry about your daughter Gordon has
Batman ever killed
yeah wasn't the first ever comic Batman
killed him he just pushed some guy in it
some chemical waste to it it seems to be
one of his favorite things to do judging
by this it maybe was angry when he got
to the Red Hood and the Red Hood jumped
in there voluntarily it was like damn I
was just about to push him and you know
that's not a thing
that is the Killing Joke it's not you
know too lengthy but I think it's a
perfect length and for what it is you
know it is one of the Batman stories I
haven't read as many as death but it's
definitely one of my favorites is a
great Alan Moore story you've probably
read it if you're listening to a
watchman podcasts if you haven't yet
definitely pick it up definitely read it
and come back to this episode and check
out our analysis of it
obviously and go watch the animated
movie and ruin it for yourselves
yeah it's that trash of hurdies fresh
the first 45 minutes Bruce Timm who did
the animated have Batman series
legendary he basically has free reign
over it and he has Batman and Barbara
like date like sleeping with each other
am and also there's the character that
likes it's basically a Batgirl story and
it's about Batman Batgirl capturing this
character who's also obsessed with her
much in the same way that the Joker is
so the the pretty much tell the same
story twice and but some of the dialogue
is like horrendous like there's a
Barbara's got this like gay friend in it
who you know we I'm not against gay
people Tom you know I'm but it's so it
doesn't fit the lay you know having this
sort of ugly BAE character um so
cracking jokes alongside Barbara Gordon
and then she's talking like the villain
at one point like Batgirl hits a hits
him and he goes is it that time of the
month I know it's very like it's got
none of the sophistication that Moore
had it's very stereo like to get if they
had like a fully developed gay character
I wouldn't mind but it's very much the
stereotypical gay best friend character
who's there to like a dagger land a teen
love and then they Batman and Batgirl
sleep with each other and she rings up
like she rings mob like hey it's not
it's only like we we slept with each
other like nothing major you know like
you don't have to care I don't care we
don't care we can just be like this and
that's genuinely like one of the
dialogue scenes in it and it's just it
completely cheapens the character and I
would say if you want to watch The
Killing Joke just start 45 minutes in
and you'll be fine lads you'll be fine
and they do not press for a whine to not
watch any of that DVD before that okay
okay yeah of her I remember when it came
out it was Panda and not seen it yeah
what about the actual take on the main
story it's exactly the same and Mark
Hamill does the Joker voice but he does
a really dialed back
version of it and he seems almost bored
I'm and it's that's disappointing as
well like Hamill obviously didn't an
amazing job with the anime amazing job
with the animated series and the Arkham
games so it's it's really just a shame
around it be honest and the worst thing
is that Mark Hamill for years said he
would only ever come back and do the
Joker if they did The Killing Joke and
they did it and it was kind of the ya-ya
more isn't too much you a fan of The
Killing Joke he actually said in 2003
quote The Killing Joke is a story about
Batman and Joker
it isn't about anything he ever gonna
even care in real life because the
Batman and Joker are not like any human
beings that have ever lived so there's
no important human information being
employed yeah it was something that I
thought was clumsy misguided it had no
real human importance it was just about
a couple of licensed DC characters it
didn't relate to the real world in any
way yeah fair enough I mean obviously
they're not real I don't know what area
I think more just sort of more is you
know he's his own worst critic and he
probably doesn't like most of his work
to be honest
which makes him cooler because like the
lads got such high standards of himself
if you don't like your own stuff though
you're never gonna get better if you
make like what you think the perfect
thing is you're just gonna end up
mimicking it all the time so I'm glad
that we've got Helen Moore who hates his
own stuff and he's constantly trying to
better himself yeah he's he's doing his
war and peace' novel on Northampton
which is out Jerusalem but I mean the
influence on Joker stories cannot be you
know overstated really it's quite
incredible how much yes led from the
mythology that's a great book to be
honest it's almost as good as Doomsday
Clock if you - which is a perfect 10 out
of 10 they go by their abuse I just look
it on the Wikipedia because there's many
video games that it's referenced in
apparently apparently an injustice 2013
you could get logo costume yeah yet the
Killing Joke pack ichigo's Hawaiian
attire Red Hood and his hat and long
coat that's very cool they also do it
quite heavily in Batman Arkham Knight
where Batman gets cast with
scarecrow fear toxin and he goes to
Barbara's apartment and he has a
hallucination that she's on the floor
sprawl I know that she's in her
apartment and then she answers the door
the Joker person and shoots her and it's
it's a nice little callback and I don't
think anything that's ever referenced it
though was dinner as good as the
original like on the on my website when
I reviewed it they got a nine point five
out of ten
right so yeah really good but yeah this
is about light which is almost as high
as Doomsday Clock right well no it's
like to say but I'm sorry it's not very
good it's just I'm not injured but I'm
we're gonna review it and like you know
I enjoy reviewing it and stuff like that
I know what happens death but it's just
I can't comedy father but it's like a
lot of things a lot of films on Rotten
Tomatoes get high schools and I watch
them I'm like really yeah I'm gonna do a
video about Rotten Tomatoes don't work
Tom and just aggregates in general don't
work because you like them
have you seen mother I know I have
enough habits place build yeah there's
people who think it's like the best film
ever made and there's people who think
it's the worst film ever made and run
tomorrow it's like 70% but you know
there's no one watching that movie who
goes oh that was a seven out of ten
movie see the people who say it's a 10
out of 10 not people who'd say to one
hour 10 so you know don't go from 2
miles yeah especially if you like DC
[ __ ] hell oh yeah
I think you've only got one [ __ ] good
movie on there in the past five years
yeah it's pretty it's pretty awful but
this is you know this has been us doing
a little detour as you say into The
Killing Joke we will be back soon for is
issue 7 or 8 run for Watchmen we've got
quite a few to go so we'll check out
please subscribe to the channel comment
on the videos get in touch of us
watching the Watchmen pod at gmail.com
you know we love to read our emails
you'll reviews your takes on Watchmen
anything else we discussed death your
websites and that if it's still up it's
not no I've been trying to fix it while
be doing
Podcast but it's not it's not happening
but the links are down below and you
definitely read the colu by the time
this is a bit peaceful yeah I'm sure
I've rebuilt it from scratch yeah oh so
yeah thank you all for listening and
deaf as always it's been good man yeah
great man
go talk and you take care everyone and
thanks very much for checking out the
podcast it's a good night from me
and it's a good night from cui yes
[Music]